Have you ever thought why did I ever agree to do that?
Have you ever wished that you knew better on how to say no
or even how to avoid volunteering to do something without
suffering undue consequences?
Do you speak up and seemingly risk your job by being the no person?
Or do you just give in,
resigning okay yes I'll do it because the executive just wants it?
We have all been there and guess what, there is no magic bullet.
But we can mitigate the angst with some techniques here.
I learned a long time ago not to say no,
but instead say yes, but… Here are the consequences of doing that activity.
For example, yes, I can deliver by August 1,
but we'll need to add 2 or 3 contractors or yes I can do this by October 1,
but I will need to push out the schedule on another area.
So every yes,
but… needs to be followed by you saying the
consequences that will occur to the customer,
okay.
It is important for them to fully understand the
consequences or options as well.
So here's another approach.
I don't say no I say choose,
that is choose one or more of the alternative options that might work for you.
So yes, but… and choose are similar substitutes to saying no.
Now you always want to demonstrate that you understand their request
and are not just dismissing or discounting it.
That's not good, that's not good customer service at all.
In addition, you are showing ownership, in other words,
yes I'm going to go do that.
You're showing creativity by well here are some options and alternatives,
and you're also saying well here are some
consequences because the world is real,
there may be some other consequences as well.
There may be times when you actually have to say no,
we get that, but yes,
but… and choose are powerful and effective means to refrain the
situations where you are facing unrealistic expectations.
This has really worked well in my career and I hope it does for you too.
Here are a few tips in helping you bridge the gap
between reality and expectations.
Set the expectation.
Don't over promise, don't under deliver.
If you set an expectation above what the customer needed,
but failed to meet it,
well you failed because in that case you have set the expectation
with the customer higher than it needed to be.
Find out exactly what the customer really needs,
not the nice to haves, I even ask that exact question,
is that a got to have or a nice to have?
Most often than not they will be honest with you or maybe it's even a blend.
For example,
what of the five things they want for Friday really
could wait until the following week?
Well perfect, I can deliver those four, but I couldn't do the fifth one.
Fortunately through those discussions we now have an
attainable plan and we're on the same page.
Also, explain potential obstacles.
Problems happen, you can choose to respond in one of two ways.
You ignore them or be all over them in such a way that the problem
becomes a golden opportunity to wow your customers.
Also a technique I like in all of my management and
leadership activities is delegate up.
So upward delegation can be a very powerful tool.
This is when you go to your boss or your business owners,
people above you in the org chart, for their guidance and help.
So when things get tough, don't avoid those people,
but instead reach out and embrace them head on.
It may seem a little counterintuitive and it may be a little nerve racking.
Some people may be afraid to talk to their customer
when things get a little dicey.
Next, leverage the influencers.
You are working with CxOs or steering groups and business leads.
There may be one or two of those people that you
connect with and you can use as a mentor.
Give them a call, tell them your situation,
ask them for their guidance and even their help.
They may take on the task of talking with some of the other
big players in the company and by working together you can
better set those expectations.
Sometimes organization charts matter.
If you are too far down the tree, they may not care or respect your position.
Yes that is not right and not correct, but it happens.
So by leveraging other influencers in the department or company,
you might get some well needed help in managing your customer's
expectations by seeking their guidance and support.
Lastly,
hope for the best and be supportive and optimistic with your team and customers,
but plan for the worst.
Maybe a better way to say that is always plan,
have options,
because things in general don't always turn out the way we expect them,
and in particular the way the customer may expect them.
So if you are struggling with your customers
understanding of reality versus expectations,
you might want to consider an SLA, that's a Service Level Agreement.
Let's check them out in the next section.
They can be a very valuable tool in setting and managing your customer's expectations.